# Background

I, the author of this library, have a long history of valuing reusability and consistency in my front-end development work, sometimes to a fault. And despite recognising and even espousing the benefits of dynamic styling libraries in the JavaScript world (which I joined after many years working with pure HTML and CSS with only sprinklings of JS), there's just something about coming "back" to the world of PHP-driven CMS theming when I work on freelance web development projects - where I can carefully craft clean HTML with human-readable class names and not a single one that doesn't need to be there - that just feels like home.

For many years I worked with WordPress developing site-specific components with [ACF Flexible Modules](https://www.advancedcustomfields.com/resources/flexible-content/), and while my agency colleagues and I didn't always agree on the best way to build our themes with them, regardless of the specifics we had complete control over the output of components we developed. Then the [block editor](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/) came along and thanks to that and the many other evolving WYSIWYG options, clients' expectations of what they could do with their sites grew accordingly. I had to find a way to balance the way I like to work with what my clients want and need.

Despite having moved into the world of enterprise web applications in my "day job", working with React, TypeScript, Styled Components and similar, the idea of having to add a JavaScript build step and React layer for every component I wanted to create for a WordPress site elicited a visceral reaction in me. While I could see some benefits, the now "old-school" developer in me saw it as overkill and shuddered at the thought of how complex troubleshooting or minor modifications could become, compared to the simplicity of doing something like logging into a client's cPanel and making a small change to a file in 5 minutes.

For my first few "Gutenberg" sites, I leant heavily on [ACF Blocks](https://www.advancedcustomfields.com/resources/blocks/) which do a great job bridging the gap, but in some cases they felt like hacky workarounds that looked and felt duct-taped into the back-end user experience. (That said, there are also cases where ACF provides a better user experience than the core blocks and editor do, so it's a balance.) I spent a lot of effort restricting use of core blocks and, in some ways, reinventing the wheel only to be dissatisfied with both the back-end user experience and the developer experience in terms of reusability and extendability.

At WordCamp Sydney 2024, [Matt Knighton](https://www.mrkwp.com/) spoke about moving from shortcodes to blocks, and when answering a question made a passing remark saying he utilised the core blocks within his own blocks as much as possible. I was in the thick of refining my approach at the time and that comment really stuck with me and I knew I should try to the same a bit more. But at the same time, coupling my precious idea of true reusability so much to WordPress and the block editor didn't feel right. I was already working hard on overhauling my new project boilerplate to include a true foundational UI library, the itch and potential need to work with other CMSs was always in the back of my mind, and I just plain don't like a lot of the markup that the core blocks generate.

What followed was:
- a lot of experimentation and trial-and-error
- embracing atomic design somewhat accidentally, and striving to couple the benefits with my existing approach
- balancing of embracing what's already available (the power of the WordPress block editor and many of the core blocks) with what I wanted to achieve (a truly reusable, extendable, and consistent set of components with clean HTML)

The result is Comet Components. It's either brilliant or an over-abstracted nightmare. Time will tell. :laughing:
